Observations Towards Implementing Formulas

Note: This argument does not close on a conclusion. It establishes various facts,
some of them useful, and leaves many things open. It may be worth revising or
extending.


* The Domain *
- The domain includes domain entities. Documents, grids, columns, grid columns,
  rows, cells, values, and formulas are all domain entities.
- A document has grids which have grid columns and rows, and each grid column has
  a column and each row has a cell for each grid column of its grid. Each cell has
  a unique row and grid column, and each row and grid column has a unique grid. A
  grid column may have a parent grid column and may be the parent of other grid
  columns, thus there is a unique partitioning of grid columns into families. Each
  column is unique to a single grid column family and is common to all grid
  grid columns in that family.
- Values and formulas are defined below. Each cell has a manual value or an
  associated formula which resolves to a value. A grid column may be associated
  with a formula, in which case the values of that grid column's cells are the
  result of calculating that formula in the context of the cell. This is described
  in detail below.

* Values and Resolution *
- A software object can be created, read, stored, and passed around in a program.
- Values, value references, and formulas are all software objects.
- A value is a value primitive or a composed value.
- A composed value is a domain-specific object or a list of values, and is a value
  that is composed of zero or more values. It is said to contain these values.
- A domain-specific object corresponds to a domain entity. There is no guarantee
  that all domain entities support domain-specific objects.
- An error is a value. A value is erroring if it is an error or it contains a
  value that is erroring.
- A value always resolves to itself.
- A value reference is something that resolves to a value given a context, which
  is a mapping of value references to values.
- A formula specifies a calculation that has no side effects and returns a value.
  A formula may have argument values that its calculation depends on.
- An argument value is something that can be resolved to a value given a context.
- A formula's resolution in a given context is the value that results from
  evaluating the formula's calculation with the resolution of its argument values
  in that context. A formula resolver produces a formula resolution from a formula
  and a context.
- Anything that resolves to a value is valid if its resolution is a valid value
  and is erroring if not. Validity may therefore depend on context.
- A value that results from one or more resolutions is said to depend on the
  elements that were used to resolve it and on any elements they depend on.

* Syntax and Authoring *
- There is a formula specification that defines what it means for a formula to be
  syntactically valid.
- Any formula that is not syntactically valid or that has an invalid argument is
  erroring. A formula may error for other reasons as well.
- A user formula is a formula authored by a user. There may be non-user formulas
  as well.
- To write a formula, a user will have a formula authoring interface. This
  interface can produce syntactically valid formulas from user input.
- Thus, the formula authoring interface and the formula resolver both depend on
  the formula specification.

* Calculating Cell Values *
- A formula is bound to a grid column and is associated with this grid column. It
  may also be associated with descendant grid columns. A grid column is associated
  with either one or zero formulas.
- Every cell has an associated row, grid column, grid, and document that supply
  the cell's context.
- A calculated cell is a cell whose grid column has a formula.
- A cell that is not calculated has a manual value that is either a value or a
  value reference. Every cell has a value that is the result of resolving its
  formula if it has one, and otherwise its manual value, using its context.
- A value is up-to-date if it would not be changed by re-resolving it with
  up-to-date versions of all its dependencies.

* Drawing Formulas *
- A drawing formula is a formula that produces a drawing value when it is not
  erroring. A drawing value may be used by another drawing formula to produce
  another drawing value or by a drawing renderer to render a drawing.


Things that are coupled:
1. Authoring a valid formula and parsing an authored formula into an IR are
  coupled through the definition of valid formula specification (syntax).
2. Confirming that a formula's evaluation is correct is coupled to evaluating all
  all of its dependencies. Decisions in (3) satisfy this coupling by providing
  that all formulas will be recalculated in their dependency partial ordering and
  that all invalidated formulas will be recalculated before their results are
  used.
3. There is some coupling between bulk formula recalculation and performance, but
  aside from the invalidation graph design already assumed all performance
  considerations may be deferred. Performance may depend on (a) reducing the
  number of formulas that are recalculated, (b) deferring some recalculations to
  favor more important ones, (c) the evaluation order of a set of recalculations
  evaluated synchronously, (d) the performance of recalculating individual
  formulas, and (e) the performance of the machinery orchestrating recalculations.
  a. Reducing formula recalculations: Recalculations occur unnecessarily if a
    formula is recalculated when its result is unchanged or is recalculated
    multiple times for an atomic set of changes. For the first, in general the
    calculation's output value may have changed whenever any of its inputs
    changed, so recalculate whenever an input changed but skip otherwise. For the
    second, it must be repeated if it calculated on incorrect (e.g. out-of-date)
    inputs but otherwise need not be repeated. Thus, recalculate formulas in their
    dependency partial ordering to avoid this issue.
  b. Deferring some recalculations: This topic will be deferred for now.
    Optimizing here is a matter of identifying a set of formula recalculations to
    defer, which happens before recalculating, deferring those recalculations, and
    managing consistency with respect to the deferral. Given a formula dependency
    graph well and incremental recalculations against the graph, which is provided
    by (a), and given that these are well suited to this problem, which will be
    assumed, this problem is decoupled from the rest.
  c. Evaluation order: Performance may be suboptimal if optimal performance relies
    on (i) the optimistic evaluation of some formulas before their dependencies,
    (ii) evaluating multiple sibling formulas (those with no dependency
    relationship) in a batch, or (iii) the relative order of independent
    evaluation of sibling formulas. Each can be deferred here:
    i. Optimistic evaluation: We assume a single-processor environment. Thus this
      provides no benefit.
    ii. Batch processing of siblings: Given an identification of siblings and the
      ability to defer their recalculation into a batch, which is provided by (a),
      and given that it is efficient to associate sibling formulas with whatever
      metadata aids batch processing, which is assumed, batch processing may be
      implemented locally.
    iii. This action can be reduced to (ii).
  d. Performance of individual formulas: Incremental recalculation is possible in
    some circumstances but is an advanced problem that will not be considered for
    now. Thus, performance of individual formula recalculations is a local matter
    of the implementation of the individual formulas and may be deferred.
  e. Recalculation machinery: Beyond the considerations above, global
    optimizations to the recalculation machinery will be ignored for convenience
    and local optimizations can be deferred.